AI #1896: Add marketplace multi-provider scenarios guidance (#2013)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/appendix/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_purchase_and_usage.md

# Marketplace Purchase and Usage Example

> This section is non-normative.

Reviewer: Check my logic here, but I believe this line should be moved to the MDPP (parent file or grandparent file) since nothing in any of these subpages is normative. It should not be added to every child page. Might be a consistency review thing.

## Scenario

> A customer purchases an annual Datadog Pro subscription through AWS Marketplace. This generates two separate FOCUS billing records: a purchase record from AWS and a usage record from Datadog. This example illustrates how `BilledCost` and `EffectiveCost` are populated by each provider, and how the two records can be correlated using `ResourceId` and `InvoiceId`.

Reviewer: I think it's incorrect to say it generates two records, one from Datadog and one from AWS. Only one record is guaranteed to be generated, which is the purchase, since all you've done here is record a purchase. The subsequent usage-based records can occur at whatever granularity and time frame the usage occurs or the provider charges for. 

In some cases, it is also possible that those metering and usage-based charges are provided through the same entity that you purchased the service from (so worth noting that case)

> A customer purchases an annual Datadog Pro subscription through AWS Marketplace. This generates two separate FOCUS billing records: a purchase record from AWS and a usage record from Datadog. This example illustrates how `BilledCost` and `EffectiveCost` are populated by each provider, and how the two records can be correlated using `ResourceId` and `InvoiceId`.

Reviewer 2: ### Examples don't reflect real-world experience

From practical marketplace usage: when you purchase a SaaS product through a CSP marketplace (e.g., AWS Marketplace), the CSP bills you for the service and you get a single marketplace line item on your CSP invoice. The actual usage data lives with the SaaS provider separately and is **not linked** to the CSP usage row — there's no shared `ResourceId`, no shared `InvoiceId`, and no automatic correlation between the two.

The examples in this PR assume both the CSP and the SaaS provider generate FOCUS-compliant billing exports with matching identifiers (`ResourceId`, `InvoiceId`) that enable seamless correlation. That doesn't reflect how marketplace billing works today:

- The CSP gives you a purchase/cost line item with no usage breakdown
- The SaaS provider gives you usage data in their own format, completely disconnected from the CSP's billing data
- There is no bilateral agreement between CSP and SaaS provider on shared identifiers

The examples would be more useful if they:
1. Acknowledged the current state — the CSP and SaaS data are disconnected
2. Showed what the CSP marketplace line item actually looks like in FOCUS today (a single Purchase row with no corresponding usage detail)
3. Described the aspirational model (shared identifiers enabling correlation) as a future goal, not current reality
4. Provided practical guidance on how practitioners can attempt to correlate these datasets manually today (e.g., matching on subscription name, time period, approximate amounts)

Without this grounding in reality, the guidance risks being theoretical rather than actionable for practitioners.

Reviewer 2: I love the concept, and it's one we should try and make happen. I just think we might need more time to get it working.

## Purchase Provider (AWS Marketplace)

AWS records the marketplace transaction as a purchase charge. Because AWS does not have access to Datadog's consumption data, `EffectiveCost` is 0 on this row. Per the `EffectiveCost` column definition, `EffectiveCost` is 0 when `ChargeCategory` is `Purchase` and the purchase is intended to cover future eligible charges. `BilledCost` reflects the full contracted amount invoiced to the customer.

## Usage Provider (Datadog)

> Datadog records the actual usage consumed against the subscription. Because the customer's payment flows through AWS Marketplace rather than directly to Datadog, `BilledCost` is 0 on this row. Per the `BilledCost` column definition, `BilledCost` is 0 for charges where payment is received by a third party. `EffectiveCost` reflects actual consumption for the billing period. Because the invoice is issued by AWS, `InvoiceIssuerName` is "Amazon Web Services" on the Datadog record, and `InvoiceId` matches the AWS invoice.

Reviewer: Feels like this should be described as the Covering charge (AWS Marketplace) and Covered charges (Datadog). we already have host provider and service provider and all the history of the old provider/publisher etc..

In this upfront purchase model, the entire cost is billed at the start, but usage is realized over time. Practitioners need to correlate AWS's purchase record with Datadog's usage data to understand true cost allocation.

- **Purchase Provider (AWS):** Records the marketplace transaction as a one-time charge, populating BilledCost and related purchase fields.
- **Usage Provider (Datadog):** Records ongoing usage, populating EffectiveCost and consumption metrics.

[**CSV Example - AWS Purchase**](/specification/data/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_m1_aws.csv)  
[**CSV Example - Datadog Usage**](/specification/data/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_m1_datadog.csv)  
[**CSV Example - Grafana Usage**](/specification/data/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_m1_grafana.csv)

Note the following details in the example datasets:

> * **Charge Period and Billing Period Alignment:** Both records share the same ChargePeriodStart (April 1st, 2025) and ChargePeriodEnd (April 1st, 2026), representing the service term. The BillingPeriodStart/End (April 2025) reflects when the purchase was invoiced. This alignment enables time-based correlation.

Reviewer 3: The narrative describes BilledCost as "empty" and EffectiveCost as "empty" for various rows. Per the spec, these must be 0, not empty/null. Key updates needed:

- Line 21: "EffectiveCost is empty because AWS lacks usage details" should say EffectiveCost is 0 (per `effectivecost.md` line 17)
- Line 22: "BilledCost is empty since the SaaS providers do not issue the invoice" should say BilledCost is 0 (per `billedcost.md` line 17)
- Lines 12-13: Purchase/Usage Provider bullet points need the same update

The framing should shift from "empty/not populated" to "0" throughout, with explanation that 0 reflects the spec's cash-basis (BilledCost) and accrual-basis (EffectiveCost) accounting model.

Author: Will address these!

* **BilledCost Population:** In the AWS dataset, BilledCost is $10,000, representing the full invoiced amount. ListCost and ContractedCost are also $10,000, as there are no discounts. EffectiveCost is empty because AWS lacks usage details.
* **EffectiveCost Population:** In the Datadog/Grafana datasets, EffectiveCost is $10,000, reflecting the actual cost based on usage (1000 GB for Datadog, 5000 active series for Grafana). BilledCost is empty since the SaaS providers do not issue the invoice. This separation prevents double-counting in aggregated views.

> * **ChargeCategory and ChargeClass:** AWS uses "Purchase" and "Standard" to indicate a marketplace acquisition. Datadog/Grafana use "Usage" and "Standard" for consumption-based charges.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **BilledCost Population:** In the AWS dataset, BilledCost is 10000, representing the full invoiced amount. ListCost and ContractedCost are also 10000, as there are no discounts. EffectiveCost is 0 because the purchase covers future usage charges (per the EffectiveCost column definition).
* **EffectiveCost Population:** In the Datadog dataset, EffectiveCost is 10000, reflecting actual usage-based cost (1000 GB ingested). BilledCost is 0 because payments are received by a third party (per the BilledCost column definition). The Grafana CSV follows the same pattern. This separation prevents double-counting in aggregated views.
* **ChargeCategory and ChargeClass:** ChargeCategory is "Purchase" for the marketplace transaction and "Usage" for consumption-based charges. ChargeClass is null for all rows because none represent corrections to previously invoiced billing periods.
```

Three fixes: (1) EffectiveCost and BilledCost = 0 with spec citations instead of "empty," (2) ChargeClass described as null instead of "Standard," (3) plain numbers matching corrected CSVs. Simplified to reference Datadog as the primary example.

* **Consumption Metrics:** Datadog populates ConsumedQuantity (1000) and ConsumedUnit (GB), along with PricingQuantity (1000) and PricingUnit (GB), showing how usage drives the cost. Grafana uses Active Series as the consumption metric, reflecting their billing model based on time series data. AWS leaves these empty as it doesn't track usage.

> * **Provider Identification:** ServiceProviderName is "AWS" for the purchase record and "Datadog"/"Grafana" for the usage record. InvoiceIssuerName is "AWS Marketplace" for the billed record, highlighting the invoicing entity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Provider Identification:** Per the Participating Entity Identification appendix (rows 3.3.1/3.3.2), ServiceProviderName is "Datadog" (the marketplace seller) for both purchase and usage records. InvoiceIssuerName is "AWS" (the CSP) for both records, as the payable invoice is issued through the marketplace. HostProviderName is "Datadog" since the hosting infrastructure is not visible to the customer. The Grafana CSV follows the same pattern.
```

The current text states ServiceProviderName is "AWS" for the purchase record. Per the entity identification table and serviceprovidername.md ("the Service Provider represents the seller rather than the marketplace operator"), ServiceProviderName is the marketplace seller on both rows. InvoiceIssuerName is the CSP on both rows.
